Dear all, we all
have loved ones, and we all
have to part ways; we can't be together
forever. That moment of separation causes
us great
suffering. Everyone has possessions, but
sometimes, possessions are lost unexpectedly. That is,
from our perspective, it's natural. In reality,
in Buddhism,
nothing is natural; everything is caused by cause and
effect. However, few people can understand the
cause and effect of losing something; they
only say, "I just dropped it." Therefore, in
the world, there's a theory called "
natural," but Buddhism doesn't
accept it. Instead, it's the
theory of cause and effect. Everything has a cause and effect before it can
have an effect.
For example, if I
lose a diaper, the cause is that I
was robbed in a previous life, and in this life,
I put it in my
back pocket, and then it was stolen.
That cause led
to the condition that I put it in my back pocket and walked
into a crowded place without being careful.
This important matter is the cause of
our loss, so where there is cause,
there is cause; where there is cause, there is effect. If
we cultivate the cause, we will change the cause; when we
see the cause change, the effect will change. Therefore,
we worry a lot, so I'll share
with the congregation here the worry
when a loved one is separated from us. That is, something
outside the body comes from the Dhammapada,
verse 4: The death of a Brahmin's daughter. Long ago, the
Buddha was preaching to his disciples in the
Jetavana garden, at the village of Kīṭa. At that time, the
daughter of a Brahmin,
about 14 or 15 years old, was virtuous, intelligent, and
much loved by her father. Suddenly, she fell seriously ill and
died. At the same time, the Brahmin's rice field, which was ripe for
harvest, was
completely burned down. The Brahmin was
extremely saddened, his mind in a state of
panic like a madman. He couldn't find a way to
relieve his grief. He heard people say that the Buddha
was a holy teacher of both gods and humans, who
preached to help sentient beings overcome suffering and
pain, so he sought the
Buddha's help. Upon arriving, he
bowed and knelt, saying, "O Venerable Buddha, I am
childless and only have one daughter."
From morning till night, he comforted his son, but then suddenly Lam fell seriously ill and
left him. The father-son bond is
natural, so the son was extremely distressed. The Buddha, with his
divine power, helped
him alleviate this sorrow. The Buddha
said to him, "There are four things in this world that
cannot last forever: 1.
Existence must perish; 2. Wealth must become
poverty; 3. Meetings must part; 4.
Health must die."
Then the Buddha recited a verse: "Existence must perish, wealth
will fade; meeting must part; birth must end." Upon
hearing this, Pham Chi's
mind was enlightened. Still grieving,
he asked the Buddha to allow him to become a monk. The Buddha,
pleased, promised, "Good! Come
here!" Pham Chi immediately transformed his hair
into the appearance of a monk. Afterward, through
diligent contemplation of the impermanence of things, he soon attained Arhatship.
This part concerns the impermanence of
things outside the body, while the
other impermanence is something one contemplates within
one's own thoughts. This contemplation of thoughts is due to the
suffering caused by wealth and the
separation of loved ones.  I'm
telling the public about a time
when Yen had an older sister, her eldest sister, who
passed away at the age of 36. It was a very
sudden death, right after Tet (Lunar New Year),
on the 23rd of January. Before and
after Tet, the
sisters would spend time together preparing for the festivities,
going to temples and festivals. They lived
close to each other and often visited each other; they were
very happy together. That night,
Yen stayed at her sister's house until 2:00 AM. The
next morning, her sister passed away.
Yen screamed in grief,
screaming uncontrollably, her mind racing with grief
at the sight of
her sister's body. She couldn't think straight for a single moment. She
recounted all the
love and affection they shared since childhood. All the emotions
she felt, all the thoughts of
losing her sister, her mother, her younger siblings,
herself—everything came flooding back. She
cried so much, her sister's children were still young. It was an
outpouring of tears. She cried until she had
no more tears left.  She cried and screamed, tears running out,
her voice hoarse, exhausted, collapsing, waking
up only to
scream again and again. But she couldn't wake up. And
so, during the 49 days after her sister's death,
Yen was distraught, constantly
worried, not knowing how her sister was doing.
So much suffering
came over her. When she was cycling to work,
sometimes she would be in the middle of the road and
not even realize she was there, completely lost in thought.
There were times when a car almost
hit her handlebars, people would turn around, yell, and curse, and only then would she snap back to reality, realizing
she was cycling on the road.
Otherwise, her mind was completely focused on
what she couldn't accept:
her sister's death. She couldn't accept it,
always thinking about how her sister was
living, how much she was suffering, it was so incredibly
painful. Yen deeply
sympathizes with Mr. Pham Chi;
this prayer is completely true. Being in
that situation was incredibly painful, agonizing, and her
mind was a mess, she lost everything. She did
n't care about living, she couldn't eat, she couldn't
sleep.  I have
nightmares about my sister, so I have many
nightmares. That's very painful.
In this lesson, the Buddha teaches
that we must contemplate impermanence in relation
to our loved ones so that we don't
suffer in a way that
brings nothing. We must contemplate this
daily. If suddenly our child
dies, what will we do? We
must think about it. If suddenly
our father dies, what will we do? If our
closest relative dies, what will we do? We must
find a way to prepare for our father's
life.
If, unfortunately, our child
suddenly dies in this society, what will
our mind be like? No one has thought about it. We
think it will last forever, but then we lift the curtain and
see death on the bed. At that moment,
suffering comes to us. This lesson teaches
us to contemplate like that. If suddenly
our siblings are alive, what will we do? And if
suddenly we die, what will our loved ones think? So
now we must
learn from Buddhism. I'm telling everyone beforehand that in the
outside world, if we
say something now, we'll die in a few days, but I, a
Buddhist, don't say anything now about impermanence.
We all live and die. If
I die tomorrow, everyone must continue
their lives. I will take care of
myself, that is, I know how to accumulate merit and
do good deeds to continue my life after death,
so everyone doesn't have to worry. It's the same for everyone else, my children, my
husband, we are all
here, but each person has their own karma, their own
destiny. We all have to die, and after death, we all
have to be reborn; we won't meet
again. So, you must know how to take care of yourself.
When I say this, after one, two, or three years, you
don't see me die, and your family doesn't see
me die. Isn't that bad luck? I'm here, I
study the scriptures. I'm not saying this to ward off bad luck.
In this world,
no one lives without dying. Some
die of old age, some
die young, some die of illness, some
die in accidents, some die from nature, some die
in war, some die from animal bites or
insect bites, some die
from spontaneous diseases. So
there are many kinds of death, and we must
accept that among us, in
our families, we will live well together,
but when we die, we must
know that everyone must die and accept it.
Calmly, but I have to think about it
every day so that I can accept it
beforehand. If this person dies,
what will my life be like? If my mother dies,
I have to take responsibility for my siblings.
I have to be responsible before
then, I don't need to ask. Because at that time,
Yen asked me, "Sister, you're dead this year,
who will take care of us now?
You were alive, you still took care of us,
who will take care of us now?" It's truly
heartbreaking. It's not that I'm selfish and only care about
myself, but because of the affection I've always relied on her for, I
still love her that way. It's not that
I'm afraid
no one will take care of me, but because of that love, it's so heartbreaking. It's so
painful.
If we knew about
impermanence, if our husbands also die,
we would treat them better. But
sometimes we think we'll live forever, so we don't treat them
well. That's what we're experiencing in the present.
I think that
our parents will also leave us,
so we should be good to them.  If
I can't understand the impermanence of things in relation to
those around me, I'll never be
good to them,
never forgive them, never love them.
For example, my friend... I'm so angry, so furious,
but I want revenge. But then
I think, what if they die?
In life, people say, "The duty to the dead is the
ultimate duty. You harmed me, you hurt me, but even
if you die today, I'll still come to visit
you a little. Either way, they're dead, so let's
forgive them." So why not forgive them while they're
still alive, instead of waiting until they die?
Now, let's just contemplate their death so that
we can forgive them.
This contemplation of impermanence allows
us to cultivate a kind and virtuous heart.
My mother, for example, I was selfish, not buying
her a new dress, not giving her a
meal. If,
today, this selfish thought arises, and
I could give, but I didn't. Tomorrow, even if I
want to give, I won't. So,
from this contemplation of impermanence, I can
live better with my parents,
my siblings, my friends, and the
world.  This is the situation, for example, with neighbors.
If we keep arguing with
them, and they die, there will be
no chance for forgiveness. So let's
live well together while we're still alive,
and when they die, we'll feel we haven't
wronged them, nothing to regret,
because life inevitably leads to death.
So, in
these relationships, if they die, we
won't feel remorse,
regret, or excessive
sorrow because after death they will be reborn.
For ourselves, we
won't feel guilty towards them. And for them,
we won't be overly sad because we know
they will continue their karma and be
reborn. We can only find
ways to benefit their karma. Understanding impermanence,
we teach our children how to accumulate merit.
We must teach them how to accumulate merit, how to
abandon evil and do
good. If impermanence comes to them, they will be
reborn in a good place. That
means understanding impermanence for others,
helping others.  If impermanence comes, they
will be better off. But if we don't worry
about it, when they die, we'll go around
burning money, gold, and paper offerings like Yen,
wailing mournfully. What benefit will that bring to
them? It won't
benefit our relatives either. If we
don't benefit them, it's better to
teach them about karma, to abandon evil and do
good. That's why I say, even if the
world is full of treasures, it's not as good as seeing the truth.
If we only
give our children and relatives money and food,
but don't give them knowledge of
karma, they won't benefit
in their next life when impermanence comes. That's
why Yen reminds everyone that if
we give to our children, we should teach them about
going to the temple to learn how to give
alms, how to make offerings, how to love,
how to forgive—that's also about worrying about
their impermanence. That's regarding family and friends
in the sutra. And
what about possessions? We also have to worry about the impermanence
of possessions. The rich must also think about the
poor; that is, while we are rich, we must think
about the time when we are poor.  This way, you won't
fall into a situation where you want to commit suicide, or
fall into a situation where you
don't know how to handle it and become desperate.
Imagine being rich like this, and thinking, "What if
I lose everything? I'll go work for someone else." That means
you have to think ahead. Right
now, everyone strives for wealth and
prosperity; nobody strives for everything to be gone.
But you have to plan ahead so that when the time
comes, you
'll be calm and composed. With calmness and composure, you can be a support
for your loved ones. If you panic,
you'll just end up
cursing and fighting each other.
So, every day, you can tell
your loved ones, "Today we
have money, but there are so many people
out there suffering and starving. They don't have enough to eat. They eat
rice and vegetables;
sometimes they don't have enough to eat or
enough clothes to wear. If you find yourself in a
situation where you're broke, will your children
accept not having enough to eat or enough clothes to wear? Will
you seek
death? If you think
about death, you're not as good as
those people. That's how you naturally develop a
solution for yourself.  It also forms a way of
dealing with those around you.
By then, you've become accustomed to it,
so even if your children are too poor, they won't
resort to stealing. That's
beneficial to the world. It doesn't cause
your loved ones to steal or become
destitute because they've
accepted the reality from the moment they were poor,
that is, they've accepted their
poverty. When you're rich and know
how to handle poverty from the time you're rich,
you're at peace and self-controlled when you're
poor. But those who only live
in wealth and then experience
upheaval due to karma lose control of their
circumstances and
cause trouble for those
around them. Then they blame others, saying, "
Because I'm like this," "Because of this," blaming everything
without being able to handle the present situation. They're not at peace
in all circumstances, so
the impermanence of wealth is the same.
There are rich and there are poor. The rich eat well, the
poor eat what, the rich eat nothing, the poor eat nothing. The rich are full, the
poor are hungry. That's
how it is.  We
can accept any situation, so the
monks are the same. Why do monks go
begging for
alms? They beg for alms so they can be at ease, whether they
receive a lot or a little, whether they are hungry or
full.
For example,
in the forest, we see monks always
begging for alms, but
inside the forest, they have to beg for alms, sometimes hungry, sometimes full. That means they
must cultivate a
mind of self-reliance in all
circumstances, without generating any thoughts, yet remaining at ease, calm, and
without attachment. Whatever comes to them is
peaceful. In Buddhism, this is
called an unmoving mind before all phenomena,
meaning the mind is not agitated. Liberation lies
there. So, we must achieve
liberation in parts. We must ensure our minds are
not agitated, that we do not harm sentient beings, that we do
not cause suffering to those
around us. When karmic events
occur, we remain calm, and in
times of poverty and
hardship, we are still a support for
many people, still bringing
peace to everyone because we say, "Don't worry."  Listen,
we can eat less, and naturally, if
one person is in good spirits, those
around them will be in good spirits too. But if
one person is distraught,
those around them will be distraught as well.
So today, Yen came to let me know that
if a loved one dies, if all possessions are
stolen or taken away, can one remain at peace? If
all possessions are gone and loved ones die, can one remain
calm? Or how to behave
when all possessions are gone and loved ones die?
The way to behave when all possessions are gone and
loved ones die is to remain at peace and still be a
support for many people. Otherwise, if
all possessions are gone, you suffer, causing suffering to
others; if loved ones die, you
suffer, causing suffering to those
around you. This is very beneficial.
[Applause]
[Music]